Translation guidelines intro (#832)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-09-10-localization-guide/index.en.md

---
title: "Introducing the rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines"
author: 
    - Yanina Bellini Saibene
    - Maëlle Salmon
    - Paola Corrales
    - Elio Campitelli
editor:
- Steffi LaZerte
date: '2024-09-10'
slug: localization-guide
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - multilingual
  - Community
  
description: ""

---

> Since 2022, rOpenSci has been developing tools and processes to localize and translate our content. As a result of this effort, we created a set of guidelines to assist our community in translating and localizing our resources. 

Reviewer: line break after each sentence?

> We're excited to introduce the first version of the rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines.

Reviewer: right before publishing the post would be a good time for a GitHub and Zenodo release :wink:

Author: Yes!

1. [Preface](https://translationguide.ropensci.org): A brief overview of the book's purpose, intended audience, the goals of the guidelines, and instructions on how to contribute.

2. [Motivation](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/motivation.html): This section explains the importance of localizing and translating our resources. It discusses the impact of language barriers, the principles of community-driven localization and translation, and how these activities contribute to community building.

3. [General Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/intro.html): This section introduces the concepts of localization and translation, explaining how they enhance accessibility. It also outlines the technical infrastructure, work organization, and general aspects of the translation process.

4. [Translation and Review Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/howtoreview.html): This section offers a detailed guide on translating and reviewing our resources. It covers how to contribute to a new or existing language project and manage the localization and translation process. It also provides technical and general review guidelines to ensure translation quality.

> 5. [Specific Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/specific_guidelines.html): This chapter varies by language. It contains specific guidelines for localizing and translating content based on community agreements. For instance, the rules defined by the Spanish-speaking community may differ from those of the English-speaking community. This section also addresses the localization of citations, code, diagrams, and data, and includes a glossary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. [Specific Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/specific_guidelines.html): This chapter has specific content for each language. It contains specific guidelines for localizing and translating content based on community agreements. For instance, the rules defined by the Spanish-speaking community may differ from those of the English-speaking community. This section also addresses the localization of citations, code, diagrams, and data, and includes a glossary.
```

6. [NEWS](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/booknews.html): This section documents all changes made to the guidelines in each version.

## Next steps

This guide is designed for those interested in localizing rOpenSci materials or contributing to the maintenance of localized content. It is also useful for anyone tasked with localizing material for another community or group. We hope that our processes, agreements, and lessons learned can benefit other communities as well.

> The guide is available in English and Spanish, with plans to translate it into other languages, like Portuguese.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The guide is available in English and Spanish, with plans to translate it into other languages based on our active translation projects, like Portuguese.
```

---
title: "Introducing the rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines"
author: 
    - Yanina Bellini Saibene
    - Maëlle Salmon

>     - Paola Corrales

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Pao Corrales
```

    - Elio Campitelli
editor:
- Steffi LaZerte

> date: '2024-09-10'

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to update the date here and in the folder

slug: localization-guide
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - multilingual

>   - Community

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - community
```

We've seen firsthand the challenges non-native English speakers face in scientific communication.
This section explains the importance of localizing and translating our resources. 
It discusses the impact of language barriers, the principles of community-driven localization and translation, and how these activities contribute to community building. This chapter is our argument for change. 

## [Overview](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/intro.html):  Our Technical Framweork

This section introduces the concepts of localization and translation, explaining how they enhance accessibility. We introduce the tools and methods that make community-driven translation possible,
outlining the technical infrastructure, work organization, and general aspects of our translation and localization process.

## [Translation and Review Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/howtoreview.html): Our Idea in Practice

This section offers a detailed guide on translating and reviewing our resources. 
It covers how to contribute to a new or existing language project and manage the localization and translation process. 

> It also provides technical and general review guidelines to ensure translation quality balancing machine translation's efficiency with the qualified understanding that only human reviewers can provide. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also provides technical and general review guidelines to ensure translation quality: balancing the efficiency of machine translation with the qualified understanding that only human reviewers can provide. 
```

> ## [Specific Language Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/specific_guidelines.html): Embracing Linguistic Diversity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### [Specific Language Guidelines](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/specific_guidelines.html): Embracing linguistic diversity
```

> This chapter has specific content for each language. 

Reviewer 2: Otherwise sounds like we have all the languages (not just yet 😉)
```suggestion
This chapter has specific content for different languages. 
```

> This chapter has specific content for each language. 

Reviewer 2: Did you want to mention that this is specific to each language version of the guide? Or is that not relevant for this post?

Author: Yes, it is relevant.

It aims to offer guidance on handling everything from technical terms to cultural nuances, respecting the unique characteristics of each language and the community agreements on how to localize and translate content.
This section also addresses the localization of citations, code, diagrams, and data.

> This chapter include our collaborative glossary which is a comprehensive terminology resource useful as a reference and to help translators make consistent, informed choices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This chapter includes collaborative glossaries which are comprehensive terminology resources, useful as a reference and which help translators make consistent, informed choices.
```

> ## [NEWS](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/booknews.html): 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### [NEWS](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/booknews.html)
```

This section documents all changes made to the guidelines in each version, by whom, and shows the continuous improvement of the guide. 

## Next steps

This guide is designed for those interested in localizing rOpenSci materials or contributing to the maintenance of localized content but we hope it is also useful for anyone tasked with localizing material beyound our community. 

> We expect that our processes, agreements, and lessons learned can benefit other communities as well.

Reviewer 2: "expect" isn't wrong, but for some reason, it just sounded a tad pretentious to me, although I'm not sure it really is.
```suggestion
We want our processes, agreements, and the lessons we've learned to benefit other communities as well.
```

Author: Good to know.  It is the translation I got from "esperamos" in Spanish :-P

Reviewer 2: I also looked up synonyms for "hope" and "expect" was one of them 😁

This guide is a living document that will continue to improve with contributions from members of our community, refining and expanding our work.
It is available in English and Spanish, with plans to translate it into other languages based on our active translation projects, like Portuguese.

We see it as a starting point for conversation, collaboration and meaningful change in the way we share scientific knowledge across language boundaries.

If you'd like to contribute to translation efforts or improve this guide, please check out the [list of languages for which there are active translation projects and their statuses](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/translation_guide#active). 

You can contact us at info@ropensci.org or [open an issue in this repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/translation_guide/issues).

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add a final uplifting sentence? Something like

"Happy Translating!"
"Now go forth and translate!" 

or something like that 😅 .

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Now go forth and translate!
```
